## REVIEW 1

The authors studies different issues of tree transformation in the space of time-trees.
A time-tree is a phylogenetic tree in which each node has an integer time stamp.
The NNI operation is a popular operation used to enumerate rooted and unrooted unweighted phylogenetic trees.
Here, the authors generalize the NNI operation to time-trees and also introduce the two new operations: interval length change by one unit and the swap of the ranks of the tree nodes on an interval.
Different results are obtained on how many time trees can be generated by using one of these operations and how many operations are needed to obtain an arbitrary time-tree from a given tree.

This is a theory paper.
The contributions of the paper include (1) generalization of the NNI operation to time-trees,  (2) the maximum degree of and (3) the lower and upper bounds on the diameter of the transformation graph that have time-trees as vertices and edges representing one-operation transformation.
Both the lower and upper bounds are obtained by applying the technique used for unweighted phylogenetic trees in [STT92].
One question the authors should discuss but did not do is whether or not the gap between the lower and upper bounds mentioned above is large.
The authors also pose a conjecture on computing the shorted transformation from one tree to another.

The paper is interesting probably only for theory people.


## REVIEW 2

This is a very lovely graph theory paper, but the current biological applications are limited.
Recomb may not be the best venue for this paper: the authors should consider WABI.

The authors consider the project of discretizating time-trees, a form of phylogenetic tree that encodes absolute divergence dates in internal nodes and sampling dates in leaf nodes,  and studying random walks that give distances between them.
They pose some very interesting questions about the complexity of computing their distances: these are generalizations of some of the questions that have been studied for NNI graphs and the so called NNI distance, where some of the previous complexity claims for deciding the NNI distance in polynomial time turned out to be false, refuted by Li, Tromp and Zhang.
It is possible that by making the object more complex, these new discrete time-tree graphs might obey the so-called "Split theorem" which would mean the distances might be computable efficiently.
They show that the counter example to the Split theory for NNI graphs for caterpillar trees does not follw for their new objects, giving hope that a distance might be polynomial time com!
putable.


## REVIEW 3

This paper purports to provide a basic theoretical underpinning for discretized time-trees.
It is written as a textbook more than as a research paper, with (too) many definitions and symbols, and a number of results in the form of theorems.
There is no direct connection between the theory developed here and specific problems in computational biology: this is a pure math paper, with nothing to say about computation and less about biology.
The title is misleading, in the sense that about the only possible use for the results developed here is an application (not done in the paper) in the analysis of MCMC algorithms for inference of these discretized time-trees.
It is thus difficult to judge the significance of the work: most results in phylogenetic estimation are practical, as convergence theorems, even those that offer some bounds on rates, have nearly zero predictive value regarding the speed and quality of computations of a particular choice of MCMC method.
Thus the only way to judge this submission is as a math paper.
And here it falls sadly short: all of the lemmata and almost all of the theorems are trivial, not significantly different from existing results for phylogenetic trees without time stamps at nodes.
The difference between RNNI and NNI is a nice observation, but one of unclear significance.
Overall, this seems to be a prelude to something interesting, but of little interest in itself, espe.
at RECOMB.
Something like COCOON would seem to be a better target for this kind of work.

